Remember, if I get this, that means I'm
strong enough for 300 for
one. I'm rolling my lats to start today.
I've done a lot of volume on my bench
press session and just upper body in
general. So, everything is tight. And
I'll tell you now, when I come into
squat, you see how tight my shoulders
are. I have to hold the bar super wide.
I'm trying to bring my hands in closer,
and it takes me set after set to
gradually bring it in. So, what I'm
going to do today is foam rolling for my
lats. Lats, Terry's major. I definitely
don't stretch the muscles I'm going to
be training. I mobilize. I take the
action through the full range of motion,
but I don't want to stretch. I don't
want to perform static stretches on my
lower body muscles and I don't want to
foam roll them either because that can
temporarily weaken the muscles. You want
to contract those muscles through the
session. So research says that
stretching a muscle, static stretching a
muscle before strength session uh
decreases performance. So I don't want
to do that. But this isn't a muscle that
I need
to use to lift heavy weight. My lats I'm
talking about or anything of my upper
body. So performing some upper body
stretches before to allow me to get into
the positions that I need going to help
me hold the bar a little bit closer.
Because whenever I do a low bar
squat, the cue that I like to use is
hold the bar as close as your shoulder
mobility
allows while still being able to
maintain the right position. All right?
So, not just too close for the sake of
it, like you got to get the right
position.
X, this is where it's very very
tight from
my high rep
benching. The other day I did two sets
of eight top sets. Then I did two sets
of 10 shoulder press. whole bunch of
other
work. And yeah, my shoulders, my pecs
are
tight. Someone commented about my bougie
bottle. Uh yeah, this is just tap water
and I just refill it. I do like glass
bottles, so I get one of those every
week or
so and I pour salt in it. If you use the
shaker all the time and you think that
it's clean, like after a week or, you
know, two weeks, it starts getting mold.
So that's yucky. Don't do that. So
that's why I buy the glass bottle and I
refill it. And what's in here? It's
about half a liter. So what's 375 mls? I
put half a teaspoon of salt and then I
refill that during the
day. Equipment time. So that was a whole
bunch of warm-ups with bare knees. Now I
put my knee sleeves on and I'll even put
my belt on loose and I'll keep the
equipment on from start to finish. Even
though I don't really need it, I just
like to
practice everything
perfectly.
So loosest setting for the
belt and uh we start with an empty bar.
So this is where I go collar to collar.
Literally I'm holding the collar. My
hands aren't even on the bar yet. Sorry,
on the the normal part of the bar. I'm
holding it even
wider for the first set just to make it
as comfortable as
possible. Man, damn. I'm
tight. I'm going to do a few sets of
empty bar.
Oh
man. Is that Is that tight or what? It's
unintentionally tight. You know how they
say get tight. Get tight. I don't have
to You don't have to say that to me. You
were getting in there. I I was I woke
up. I was born that way.
Yeah. I'll tell you what I'm looking at.
If you can see in the mirror, there's a
little gap underneath the dumbbells, and
that shows me my hip height. So, up
there. I'm just below parallel, like
just so that's what I'm looking
for. And that's why I like this spot.
Last week I got 290 for one and this
week the rep work is very calculated. So
now I came to the number where it's
like, oh, I'm due for 260 kg for five
reps. Uh, of course I haven't done it
yet. And uh, that's a number that I
haven't done in a damn long time. Uh,
and that scares me because it's heavy.
260 kgs for five reps. But something I
quite often say, if you can get 260 for
five, you can also get 300 for one. So,
without doing the 300 for one, if I get
this, it's kind of equivalent. Whenever
I do strength testing with any of my
athletes or anyone that I work with, I
typically don't test their one rep max
because one rep max is a skill. Uh, and
it's also, you know, a lot, it's a
riskier lift. Uh, so quite often I test
people's five rep maxes. So, here's the
thing with calculating percentages. I'm
going to give you guys a formula that I
use uh very successfully. One rep max
equals
100%. Now, every rep beneath that, you
subtract 4%. So, two rep max is 96%. So,
that's 100 - 4% is 96. Three rep max
less than another 4%. So, that's
92%. Four rep max is 88% and five rep
max is
84%. Right? All right. So, if you want
to calculate um whatever your one rep
max is based off your five, you put in
the number, you divide it by 84 and then
there's your number, right? So, let's
just say I get I get uh 260 today for
five 260 divided
by84. No, no, no. Divided by
84 84 times
100 that equals 309.
according to this formula which I'll
tell you now based on experience it
doesn't always work out to the
percentages you know 300 it's a funny
number like it's a it's where we're
getting heavy right so I say if you can
do 260 for five you can do 300 for one
but according to those percentages if I
get 260 for five it says I can do 309
for one uh but I'm going to stick with
my conservative one but anyway if you
want to calculate those numbers at home
they are pretty damn accurate so if you
want to test your five rep max and and
calculate your one rep max based off
that you you get the number that you did
for five and then you divide it by 85
and then you times it by 100 and that
gives you your calculated one rep max.
Now, here's the thing. It's calculated.
Doesn't mean you can all of a sudden do
it, right? Because one rep max lifting
is a skill, okay? So, it's very
different. So, when you're doing rep
work, think about how you unrackck the
weight for rep work. You walk it out and
you rep it out. Think about how you
unrackck the weight for a one rep max.
Your maximum squat, that's heavy, heavy,
heavy. you've got to brace yourself a
lot more carefully. You got to walk out,
you're shaking cuz it's the heaviest
weight you can do, right? So, so that's
not really factored in with those
percentages. So, the approach for the
one rep max is very different to your
approach with the rep work. So, all
those calculations tell you is your
potential. It doesn't guarantee that
that's what you can do. However, I've
been practicing my heavy singles. That's
my strategy uh for this program. It's uh
monthly, sorry, weekly undulating. So,
one week is heavy single, the next week
is rep work, single, rep work, single,
rep work, right? Um, so that's how I
like to do it. So, I've done the single,
so I'm still practicing the skill. So,
last week was 290. Arguably, there was a
little bit more in the tank. I think
there was uh but if I get 260 for five
today, that's going to give me
confidence to hit uh 300 for one next
week. Uh I say that very loosely that
it'll give me confidence. I won't be
that confident. I get scared every time
I do a squat session. Um, but that's
just how I work. Squats make me nervous.
Pre-workout. Pre-workout. Long black
with honey. Uh, this is also tea with
honey. That's got That's um lemongrass
and ginger. It just tastes nice. That's
not a pre-workout or anything like that.
That's my caffeine. Uh, and then this is
my salty water. And I kind of rotate
between the three of those during the
session. Okay, first uh first work set.
Sorry, it's nothing close to a work set.
This is my next warm-up set. Uh first
plate, so it's 70 kg. Uh my plate
configuration today will be four reds
and a blue. That's how I like 260. Looks
good. Uh you'll also notice that I'm
using my bumper plates. I just like the
bumper plates. It feels different. Um in
competition, I'll be using the
powerlifting calibrated plates because
when I go for a comp lift, those bumper
plates won't fit. So you can't fit 300
kilos of bumper plates on this.
Um, so yeah, bumpers, they feel nice.
Like they kind of add a little bit more
whip to the bar, which is a good and a
bad thing. So when you get quite heavy,
that whip can shake the bar and it makes
you very unstable. So that's where it's
a bad thing. Um, but when it's kind of
like the in between and it's a
manageable weight, you use that that
whip and it allows you to kind of like
it feels soft at the bottom and you use
it to catch the bounce. Uh, so that's
what I'll be going for here. But then
when I get to yeah 280 and plus using
the bumper plates shakes me too much.
But for this I'm going to
hopefully use it for a nice technical
like a soft landing and it'll help
bounce me up. Okay. 70 kg.
So, you know what
happened was on the wrong side and these
are split. They're very stiff and they
split. And it when it's on my right leg,
the one that's split, when it's on my
right leg, it digs in. And for some
reason, it's must be in a slightly
different position for the left leg. So,
it doesn't. So, I need to have the split
one on the left leg. That's why I don't
feel it. When it's on the right leg, it
digs in. Not so bad if you just do one
rep, but after the end of the session,
you feel it. And then you take it off
and you're unable to squat again for a
week
because you can't well you can but just
not with these sleeves on because it's
cut and it
hurts. So I just had to change them over
and now that my legs are a little bit
pumped and sweaty, they were a lot
harder to get on and off. Nine sets uh
you know including that first plate.
Well, if we go barbell. So barbell is
set one, first plate is set two. 10
total
sets. So two sets down, eight to go.
Remember, if I get this 26 260 for five,
that means I'm strong enough for 300 for
one.
Okay. Comfortable for the squat. Not
comfortable for the arms.
Three down. Three down. Seven to go.
So we go 25 kg jumps. 95, 120, 145, 170,
195, 220. Right. So 25 kilo jumps. When
you see the red, red and half, right? So
red, red and half. And then two reds,
two and a half. And then when we get to
220, we go up in 20 kg jumps. So we go
to 40, 260.
1:45. Every week I watch my videos and
there's always errors and I noticed that
the last couple of weeks the depth
wasn't quite where I wanted it to be. Uh
it's kind of like very borderline. I
don't want it to be borderline. I want
it to count. Right? So, which is crease
of hip needs to be below the top of the
knees. So, that's crease of hip needs to
be below the top of the knees.
Right? And something that I noticed with
my bracing is if I don't brace the right
way, it restricts my depth. So,
sometimes, so the mistake is arching
your tail too much. When you arch your
tail too much, you can't get that range
of motion. So, the cue is to piss up a
wall, right? And so watch this. So this
is me arching my
tail. Now this is me pissing up a
wall. All right. So I'm posteriorly
rotating my pelvis. Well, it's actually
a neutral position. That's just
anterior. When you go too anterior to
arch your tail, it restricts your depth
and it's not the right brace. So that's
what I do with the videos, you know,
between squat sessions. I look at it and
I analyze it and I come back and it's
like, you big silly. You weren't doing
that. So now uh Musty actually noticed.
He said, "You're going deep." And I
said, "Yeah, because I'm bracing
properly." So check it
out. I'll brace properly again.
[Music]
Hopefully you can see from the camera
that last little dip. That's to get me
below
parallel. Little dip and it adds a
little bit of an increase in the stretch
of the muscle which allows you to bounce
off. That's the stretch reflex. Sleeping
on my shoulder.
Funny. It's uh woke up with bit of
soreness in the shoulder. So this
shoulder is a little bit tighter than
usual. So I'm kind of grabbing the bar.
This is called a talon grip. So I want
my hands to be here for my top set. So
every set my shoulder needs to get
warmer and warmer and warmer and allow
for me to bring my hands in. But for now
I'm jamming my hands against here.
That's as tight as I can go. And that
position is is twisting my fingers. It's
hurting my
fist. Next set.
I think now I'm going to talk less and
focus
more. When I talk too much,
um, it makes my mind veer off the task
at hand and that's when I come in for
the next set and it feels heavier. So,
it's kind of like the right mind space
for lifting heavy isn't to get too
psyched up. That's fatiguing. But at the
same time, you don't want to be too
relaxed either. It's the sweet spot. If
you're too relaxed, everything feels
heavy. And that's not nice. It's
disheartening to go, you know, I'm only
at half of what I need to be doing and
that feels heavy. Oh my goodness. You
know, it's got to feel like I mean, that
was pretty easy, but still. These are
now the weights. So this
195, you know, it's still supposed to be
easy, but if I'm not switched on
properly, it'll feel too heavy, and I
don't want that. So, probably going to
talk less now. Um, get a little bit more
switched
on. One, two, three. I've got four more
sets to go and then that's it.
Wow.
Rest periods so far have been about 3 to
4 minutes. I'll probably take it to
about 5 minutes
now and then extend that out. So my last
warmup set, we'll do the second last
warmup set will be 240. I'll probably
take 6
minutes after that for the top set.
[Music]
Oh
man. It's been
[__]
Come
on. Come
on. Come on.
[Music]
Nice, man. Nice work. Why am I doing
this to myself? Why am I doing this to
myself?
What happened there, man? I don't know
what happened. Like, every single rep
felt like it was my one rep max and it's
like, okay, well, I'll just do another
one rep. And then it was
like, I'm going to be really sad if I
miss the fifth
rep. That's all I was thinking. Like,
I'm going to be so sad if I don't get
this.
What a funny motivation.
It was like normally it's like come on,
I got it. But now I come in, it's like,
oh, why is it so heavy?
Oh, that first rep was so hard. That's
how it was. That's how that's my
internal dialogue. Oh, that set was so
hard. Please do more. And I go, it's
like, oh, that's going to be my limit.
What if I fail?
No, I wasn't like that exactly, but it
was pretty [__] It was pretty [__]
Now, I'll tell you the the best thing
about all of this is my camera didn't
record it.
Well, we'll see. So, I got 25
seconds. Anyway, lucky for Mustafa. I
would like to see it. Five reps on
260. Why? Why would you do that to
yourself? Do you know what I mean?
Like so you can tell people what? Oh,
look at
me. [__] oath. That's why. Look at
me. I can do 260 for five. And do you
know what that means? Do you know what
that means? 300 for one. Yeah. Yeah.
Well,
yeah.
Next
week. Next week. So, um Okay.
the show must go on. So, we can't stop
there. Do you know what I'm saying?
Because that's not a very complete leg
day. And today, I promise you, a
complete leg day, right? So, let's think
about this. So, the first exercise of
the day, like I took myself to limit.
So, there's no point doing more sets,
right? If you're around last week, I did
a whole other thing on top set back down
sets where I did only this style of
squat. So, that's my first exercise. We
got the skill part out of the way.
That's a low bar squat. So the first
exercise of the day is the highest
relevance to achieving your goal. For me
as a powerlifter, highest relevance is a
low bar squat. Now secondary exercise,
this is where you may be familiar with a
term called avoiding exercise
redundancy. So that's a hip dominant
squat. So what you want to do is choose
an exercise that targets something
slightly different to what I just did.
So that is, you know, that's whole body,
right? It's hard to say that was hips or
legs or back, soul, there's everything,
right? But technically, a low bust squat
is more hip dominant. So, it's a, you
know, you're bending forward more,
right? And there's it's a more acute hip
angle. So, there's more hip joint
flexion. Therefore, more demand for hip
joint
extension. So, why do more hip extension
exercises? So, what are the hip
extension exercises? Like a leg press is
typically hip extension or hip dominant
squat. So what I want to factor in is
something that I neglected in the main
movement. What did I neglect in the main
movement? What did I neglect here? I
neglected knee bend. Right? So therefore
I want to factor in secondary exercise
where I do factor in knee bend because
that's going to I call that you know
knee dominant or in other words quad
dominant squat. So first exercise hip
dominant. Second exercise you know my
favorite one stiletto squat. Uh so
that's what I'm going to work on now.
So, uh, high bar stiletto squat focusing
on full knee bend to target the muscles
that I neglected in the main movement.
Let's do this.
No, not same weight. So, that was just
260. I can't do that with the uh
stiletto squat. This is much harder,
right? As well as, you know, you got to
factor in the secondary exercise. Like,
now we're fatigued, right? Right? So you
can't just keep going smashing yourself
all through the day. So we got to
consider a less fatiguing secondary
exercise. So it's less fatiguing main
like it's hard but it's less fatiguing
maybe mainly because uh it's a technical
component. So it's full knee bend a
little bit slower. Uh focus on um you
know technique rather than just shifting
the heavy weight and quadriceps
development. So, I'll be going for my
last session was eight reps, sorry, five
reps on
180, you know, I don't want to go
heavier than that. So, maybe I'll do six
reps on 180. So, that's a progression
from last week. That's what I've been
doing is the same weight, but slowly
progressing in reps. Um, that's another
form of progressive overload. So, I'm
going to do a quick warm-up set. Um, so
I'll start over again because I'm
smashed and it's a new movement and I
just want to relax a little bit. But the
warm up will be fast, but that's what
I'm going to get to. 180 uh for
six, you know, I'm warm. I don't need to
be this conservative, but it's kind of
like mentally draining that top set.
like what I had to do, you know, I had
to switch on a lot um for that top set
because it's hard, right? So that is why
um I'm only doing one set because I'm
smashed, right? So now what I'm doing is
warming up very very slowly. Right? When
I write these programs for people,
they'll go straight from their top set
and then they'll go, "Oh, it's a lighter
exercise. I'm already warm. Let's just
go straight to whatever the working
weight is on the next exercise. My
recommendation is to do at least one
warm-up set. Like it's not a warm-up
set, it's a feel set. So, I'm going to
go for 180 today. So, you know, a more
logical thing, if I wasn't being so
relaxed about my session, I've got all
the time in the world. Um, but if I
wasn't being so relaxed about the
session, I'd probably do I'd bring it
back to 160 and do just a feel rep on
160 and then I'd go to my top set. But
instead, uh, I'm going to just do it a
little bit slower. So, one plate, two
plate, three plate, three and a half
plate, and then we're on high bar to
allow for me to be more upright, heels
elevated to allow for full
depth. Okay, so now Must
uh high
res version. Let's
Check it out. Yeah. Good first rep,
hard, but still got it. Good second rep,
hard, but still got it. I'm going to say
for every rep. Three. You know what?
That felt harder than what it
looks. Pretty good. Pretty
good.
Oh, yeah. I'm happy.
That
was I was happy. That was
happy. I don't want to bite off more
than I can chew. Of course, 295 would be
the most logical progression, but 295 is
not a number. 300 is 290 300 kind of you
go up in increments like that. Um,
that's going to be very challenging.
That's going to be very challenging.
Everything has to be right. you know, I
need to have, you know, make sure my
sleep the night before is good. My sleep
has been really good, actually. I get to
bed at 9:00 and wake up at 5:00. That's
my schedule, 9 to5. So, that's pretty
good. My nutrition is pretty
good. I could probably do with little
bit of extra
calories. That wouldn't hurt because if
I was to compete, I get a 24-hour weigh
in, which means uh, you know, you can
manipulate your water, your body weight
with water. So, you can do things like
water load, you know, a day before or a
couple of days before the weigh-in. So,
you drink lots and lots of water and
then you stop drinking the water a day
out of weigh-in. So, it's 40 48 hours
away from comp. You stop drinking the
water. little bit of a sauna, maybe a
little bit of a hot shower, you can lose
five% of your body weight pretty
comfortably and then put it straight
back on within the 24 hours. So, those
are the things that I'll be taking
advantage of uh if I compete in the 100
class.
Someone asked me the question, why am I
using this plate? Why don't I just use a
slant board? Uh, great question. It
makes sense. Why would I use a plate
when I can use this? Now, the problem
with the slant board is the direction is
straight ahead. When I do this squat, I
don't like to point my knees straight. I
like to have my hips open. So, if you
have a look at the
plate, you know, it's the curve. So, I
get to have my toes pointing slightly
outwards. So, it's a much more
comfortable position for me to be in,
right? Um, and it's the same for, you
know, like this versus two different
plates. You could do two different
plates, but I don't think you need to.
Like, this is actually when it's a more
quad dominant, you want your feet a
little bit closer. So that's a very big
difference between a hip dominant squat,
which is a low bar. My my stance is
wider. My stance is wider. But then to
get quads, all all you need is
a the feet directly under you and
maximizing knee bend. If you have your
feet too wide, like you can't bend to
the same degree, right? So quad dominant
squat, feet close, knees
forward. Uh and you look at my shoes as
well. Um, I recommend kind of like a
sneaker like this or or soft sole
because that contours to the edge of the
plate. If I use my weightlifting shoe,
the weightlifting shoe is a very it's a
rock solid surface. Uh, and it doesn't
contour to the plate. So, it's not as
stable. So, interestingly, you want
stability. You want rock solid for a
normal squat, but this isn't a normal
squat. So, that's why I choose one thick
plate over the rest of them.
have to rotate your feet out on the
board. What's that? Can you not rotate?
No, you can't rotate your feet on the
board because if I do, it's it's a funny
feeling. It's kind of like it it makes
my ankles pronate. So, for that to work
correctly, I would need two boards
pointed out that way. Right? So, when I
can Can you see what I mean? Have a
look. So, to have my feet outwards, my
my ankles are pronated. They they cave
in. You don't want that for this. It
positions your feet straight. That's how
it has to be. But that's not where my
hips want to go. Risky business. Well,
lightweight, so it's not risking that
much. But I guess you could say that
[Music]
All right, that was
actually pretty hard.
All right. But anyway, perfect
complement to the first exercise. So,
first exercise, hip dominant. Second
exercise. I mean, that's one variation
of a quad dominant exercise. I know
you're going to say say to me, "What
about a front squat?" Yeah, they all
work as well. They're all great
variations, except that's my favorite.
And I'll tell you why. When you do a
front squat, yes, it's very quad
dominant, but a lot of the
times the limiting factor of the
movement is upper body strength or upper
back strength. So that's where you fail
first, not the legs. So I want to be
able to when I have the bar on my back,
it's a lot stronger position. So my back
won't fail, my legs do. So that felt
like the reason why I couldn't keep
pushing is because my quads had had
enough. So that's the important part of
a hypertrophy focused exercise. So when
it's a strength focus, you don't care.
It doesn't matter. We're not targeting a
muscle. So my low bar squat, I'm not
trying to use any muscle. I'm trying to
use my whole body. But now, so that's
movement specific. Now, this is muscle
specific. So the focus is quads. Now,
there's one muscle that I've neglected.
So, we got one more workout, one more
exercise to do to focus on what we
neglected in those movements to
avoid exercise redundancy. I don't want
to do another squat pattern. I've done
all my squat patterns. So, there's one
muscle is of the four quadricep muscles.
One of them is called the rectus forous.
It crosses two joints. The others vasis
mediialis, vasis intermedi, vasis
lateralis only cross the knee joint. So
they're only responsible for knee joint
extension nothing else. Whereas so that
means they get targeted whenever you do
any squat lunge or anything like that.
But the rectus forous doesn't get
targeted very well when you do any
compound squat pattern. To target it you
need to isolate it. And the best
exercise for that is a leg extension.
And that's what we're going to do.
Extension. So this is um a lot of people
say things like this targets the rectus
for well not exactly. It hits all
quadriceps but it doesn't neglect rectus
foras right. Um so it's a very balanced
uh quadricep builder. Uh but the other
exercises the squat patterns the
bilateral the compound squat patterns uh
that you know extend the hip and the
knee because it's a compound movement it
neglects the rectus forous. So this is
the only one that doesn't ne neglect the
rectus for the way that we do that is by
fixing the hip joint. Now there are two
ways of doing the leg extension. One is
just by sitting in the chair and you
know extending your knee. But the better
way is to lean back right. So if you see
I've got the setting where I it allows
me to lean back. You can lean back even
further if you want. And what that does
is it it creates tension on the rectus
forous by extending the hip joint. So it
creates a little bit of a stretch here
so that there's there's you're kind of
like pre-tensioning the muscle and
you're targeting the muscle in a more
lengthened position. All right. So, this
is a light just warmup
set just to get a feel. I shouldn't keep
saying warm-up set. I'm warm. It's a
feel set. Right now, next
up, you know, rep range for something
like this. You know, I like anywhere
between 8 to
15.
So, this is a muscle specific exercise,
not a movement specific exercise. So,
now I'm going to enter another topic of
do you go to fail or do you not? Uh,
well, when it comes to the big compound
movements like a squat, even though that
was pretty much like I was pushing my
limit. Uh, arguably that was like an RP
9 and a half. I don't do RP 9 and a half
every week. And I recommend kind of
leaving reps in reserve for your big
compound squats. Um, because if you do
take those to fail, it's pretty hard to
recover from it. and you know the the
risk of technical breakdown. So now I'm
squatting 260 kilograms. If I break form
with 260 kgs on my back, that has a risk
of injury. So a lot of people say, you
know, you don't want to break technique
because it's high risk of injury. A lot
of the times people aren't even lifting
heavy enough for it to even be a
concern. So if you're only doing like
body weight squats, um yeah, but this is
like 2.6 times my body weight. It's
pretty heavy. If something goes wrong,
there's a chance of injury. So anyway,
so for the big compound movements, you
know, leave a rep or or two in reserve
or even up to three reps in reserve,
totally fine. But for these exercises,
like what's going to happen if I do, you
know, like high rep work here and I take
it to fail, what's going to happen?
Nothing except good work. In fact, you
should take it to
fail. You know, the only thing that
could happen is fatigue. But so what?
This is kind of different type of
fatigue that you're able to recover from
pretty quickly. Uh, you know what? I'm
talking and I'm not counting my reps,
which is totally fine. It also tells me
that it's not heavy enough. Okay, so
we'll call that another feel set and
we'll go heavier. How many reps was
that? You guys count for me?
Was it okay?
Whatever.
Hey, you know what? I got a bonus
exercise for you. This is something that
I like to do in between. So, this is
called an opposing muscle group
superset. So, this isn't part of the
quadricep group. However, it's a great
opportunity to get in some extra volume
on the
hamstrings, right? So,
uh the hamstrings also don't get trained
when you do squats, okay? They're kind
of like kind of on. But if all you do
for hamstrings development is squats,
you're going to have small hamstrings
for the same reason as the rectus forous
not being very well stimulated. They are
barticular muscles. So the hamstrings
cross the hip joint and the knee joint.
Well, three of the four heads do. One of
them is the short head of the biceps
forous. It's only responsible for knee
joint flexion.
So, this is an opportunity to get a
little bit of extra volume on the
hamstrings because a hamstring curl,
great exercise for all four heads of the
hamstrings, is a very lowcost exercise
that I can do in between. So, that's
what I'm going to do. Instead of just
doing leg extension and sit there, I'm
going to do leg extension, rest two
minutes, hamstring curl, rest two
minutes, back to leg extensions. And
then I'm going to do the same on So,
I've got two lower body days. This is my
quad focus lower body day. And then
typically the next day is like a
deadlift focus or a posterior chain
focus lower body day where I don't focus
on quadriceps so much. I focus more on
hamstrings. Right? So that's where you
do very similar style of session but
it's you know a hamstring developer and
we finish on a hamstring
curl. Then what you what can you superet
with your hamstring curls? You guessed
it leg extension. So that's an
opportunity to get twice the amount of
volume on this lowcost exercise. So
let's do some hammy curls.
Good one. So, that's a laying hamstring
curl. Uh the better choice for hamstring
curl is actually a seated hamstring
curl, but I don't have that. Uh seated
hamstring curl creates more tension on
the hamstrings. So when you're laying
down, so the the hamstrings cross the
hip joint. So when I when I lay down, so
that's my position when I lay lay down
that relaxes the hamstrings. And when I
sitting up, that's the position I create
more stretch on the hamstrings. So
therefore, the seated hamstring curl
targets the hamstrings in the lengthen
position more so than the laying
hamstring curl. But not all gyms have
access to two different types of
hamstring curl. And if that's not you,
if you don't have access to the seated,
uh it's totally fine to use the laying
hamstring curl. It's great
exercise. Just because it's not exactly
as good doesn't mean it's not good. Like
it is very good. Okay, back to leg
extensions. Leaning back.
Okay. Uh, that was 20 reps. Still too
light. That's okay. I'll go heavier
again.
You know, there's a few other things
that you can do. Of course, I mean,
anything other than these exercises,
there's so many exercises you can do.
However,
right, you can't fit them all in one
day, right? There's so many different
squat patterns. There's so many
different machines. And I know that you
guys are at home going to say, "What
about a lunge? What about a hack squat?
Great exercises, right? But I'll do
those at different phases of my
long-term plan." All right. So, when
you're lifting really really heavy to be
honest with you, I think two exercises.
So, I don't like this is a little
isolation exercise. These are lowcost
exercises. The first two that I did like
I'm done after that, right? So, there's
actually research I'm now creating a an
Instagram post on optimal volume
according to the research and there's a
meta analysis by Dr.
Rya uh H E A and colleagues talking
about the optimal amount of volume is he
doesn't say the total amount of sets but
you do the calculations it's four four
sets per exercise per day tops more than
that you know the law of diminishing
returns applies. So if you do more than
that you know you're start you're
starting to tap into your energy and
your your ability to recover from it. So
actually your performance can decline if
you're doing more than that. So four top
sets when it comes to strength different
rules when it comes to muscle building.
So if you're to do you know a recommend
a general recommendation for how many
sets per body part per week for
hypertrophy the researchers say 10 to 20
strength. According to this research
paper, uh it's more like six to
12 top sets. Here's where it changes per
movement pattern per week. So when we're
talking strength, we don't we do
movement pattern. When we're talking
hypertrophy, we do body parts. So
there's a lot of context that applies,
but at the same time, when you're doing
strength, you may have heard of those
recommendations from your favorite
authority where it's 10 to 20 sets per
body part per week for hypertrophy.
Remember that when it comes to strength
and lifting heavy weight, don't do that
many sets. it's too much. You won't be
able to recover from it. And and that's
one of the biggest problems that I see
whenever I take on a new athlete that's
at an elite level, right? So, as a
coach, what I do when I'm taking on
elite athlete, I'll say to them, you
know, you're obviously a very good
athlete. You've done a lot of great
things to get to where you are. My job
isn't to just give you a new program and
ignore what you've done in the past to
get you here. So, whenever I'm starting
with a new athlete, I'll say, "Show me a
program that you've done for the last,
you know, the last phase. It could be 3
months or whatever it is." And very
often they give me this program with
tons of volume because that's what took
them from intermediate to advanced,
right? But then once you're advanced and
you're lifting much heavier weights,
what takes you from intermediate to
advance won't take you from advanced to
elite because now you need to factor in
now that you're advanced, you're lifting
much heavier weight, right? When you're
calculating volume, it's reps times sets
times the amount of weight you lifted,
right? So that's called volume load,
right? Right. So, if you're doing, you
know, let's call it five sets of
five. I'm just going to throw numbers
out there. An intermediate lifter doing
five sets of five on one and a half
times body weightight
deadlift. And then all of a sudden, you
become advanced and you can do five sets
of five on two and a half times body
weightight deadlift. What do you think
takes more time to recover? Even though
you're stronger, it takes way more time
to recover. I'll tell you now, I train
Halflaw Bjönson. The last time I put him
on a 5x5, I don't actually remember
because he's so damn strong. uh for him
to do five sets of five. That's a high
volume program for someone that's that
strong. You guys at home might be
thinking five by five five is a strength
protocol. Yeah, it is. It is. Especially
if you're used to kind of like
bodybuilding training and 8 to 12 rep
range and you're not that strong. But
when you get stronger, uh the weight
that he can lift, you just don't want to
be doing stupid amounts of volume like
that. So anyway, back to my point. When
the focus is strength, uh yes, you
asked, "What about this exercise? What
about the hack squat? Isn't that good?
What about the leg press? Fantastic
exercises. But how many can you do in
one day? I'll tell you. Two big, heavy
exercises. And then you can throw in one
or two isolation exercises like I've
done just
now. And that's it. So anyway, that's my
session. And that is a very complete
lower body day. I'll tell you now, yes,
I miss calves. I could add some calf
work in. As a powerlifter, I'll tell you
now, you don't need calves. And I'm
going to give you proof on this. Go and
have a look at the people argue who are
the best powerliffters in the world.
There's two names that come up. Colton
the limit
breaker and John Hack Bilbo Swagons. Go
and have a look at their calves. So much
love for those guys. They're the best.
Except they got skinny
calves. It is what it is, guys. So
therefore, you don't need big calves to
be a good powerlifter. Not talking
strong man. You're running around on
your feet lifting heavy weights. You
need big carbs for strong man. Uh but
you know, for powerlifting, if your
focus is squats, uh you don't
objectively need big calves. If your
goal is aesthetics, you need big calves.
So anyway, so I could include calves if
I wanted to look good. Um but for my
powerlifting, I don't really need to,
especially if I want to be as strong as
Colton and uh and John Hack, which I do,
then don't train calves if you want to
be as strong as those guys. Anyway,
thank you for watching. Uh what do you
want to see more of? Put in the comment
section below and I'll see you guys next
time. Twice. That's okay. I got, you
know, for some
reason, not for some reason, I'll tell
you the reason. See these knee sleeves?
They make my calves pop out. The smok
and mirrors. And same with my boxing
boots, my boxing shoes. The way that
they hug my foot, it makes my calves
look like they're jacked. You ready? You
ready? Pow. You know what I mean?
Pow. Yeah. Anyway, so now you know. All
right. See you guys.